GREP-375 add scheduler backend framework (#372)
ai-dynamo/grove: docs/proposals/375-scheduler-backend-framework/README.md

- **KAI Backend**: Implementation for KAI scheduler (creates PodGroup CRs in future)
- **Kube Backend**: Minimal implementation for default scheduler (no custom CRs)

#### Layer 4: Scheduler Layer
Kubernetes schedulers that actually place pods:
- **KAI Scheduler**: Gang scheduling with topology awareness
- **Kube Scheduler**: Default Kubernetes scheduler

**Key Data Flow:**

The framework orchestrates workload scheduling through a coordinated flow between layers:
1. **Backend Initialization**: Operator startup initializes the configured scheduler backend via Backend Manager
2. **PodGang Creation**: PodCliqueSet Controller creates PodGang resources with `Initialized=False` condition, triggering Backend Controller to create scheduler-specific resources via `SyncPodGang()`
3. **Pod Configuration**: PodClique Controller creates Pods with scheduling gates, calling `PreparePod()` to inject scheduler-specific settings
4. **Scheduling Activation**: Once all pods exist and PodReferences are populated, the `Initialized` condition is set to `True`, gates are removed, and scheduling begins

For detailed lifecycle flow, see [PodGang Lifecycle Changes](#podgang-lifecycle-changes).

> ### Backend Interface Definition

Author: Yes, this is a good point. Per my understanding, for each scheduler backend, we should first define the mapping once the backend Initiation, and then we have several hooks like: PreparePod for modify topology label in spec, also SycPodGang hook to translate Topology to specific Topology in other CRDs.

> ### Backend Interface Definition

Author: Yes, I add an future note in GREP.

// Get returns the global backend instance.
// Returns nil if not initialized (caller should check).
func Get() SchedulerBackend 

// PreparePod is a convenience function that calls PreparePod on the global backend.
func PreparePod(pod *corev1.Pod) error 
```

**Design Rationale:**

- **Singleton Pattern**: Simpler than a full registry for the single-backend-per-cluster use case
- **Switch-Case Selection**: Clear and explicit backend selection, easy to add new backends
- **Initialization Safety**: `sync.Once` ensures thread-safe single initialization
- **Explicit Backend Imports**: All backends are compiled in, making dependencies clear

### OperatorConfiguration Extension

The OperatorConfiguration is extended with a simple `schedulerName` field to select the backend:

```go
// OperatorConfiguration defines the configuration for the Grove operator.
type OperatorConfiguration struct {
	// ... existing fields (Controllers, LogLevel, etc.) ...
	
	// SchedulerName is the name of the scheduler backend with which this instance of Grove operator will run.
	// Valid values: "kai-scheduler" or "default-scheduler"
	// +required

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=kai-scheduler;default-scheduler

Author: Yes, I believe so. When we support default scheduler, we may need to detect the version or whether have workload api or not.

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=kai-scheduler;default-scheduler

Author: Yes, both will be supported, and we could add config to know whether we need to create workload api or not

> 	SchedulerName string `json:"schedulerName,omitempty"`

Author: Not sure the complex mappings may be. Can we do the mappings in each backend's Init(). When we decide to support specific scheduler, we do all what we need in Init()?

- **Phase 2** (Future):
  - **KAI Backend**: Will implement `SyncPodGang` to create PodGroup CRs, providing cleaner separation and allowing KAI scheduler modifications to be minimized.
  - **Kube Backend**: Will support advanced community features as they become available, including Workload API for gang scheduling and other emerging Kubernetes scheduling capabilities. The backend will translate PodGang specifications to the appropriate Kubernetes-native scheduling primitives.

### PodGang Lifecycle Changes

**Critical Design Change**: The PodGang creation flow has been fundamentally changed to support scheduler backends that require resources to exist before pods are created (e.g., Workload API):

#### Previous Flow (Before Framework):
1. Pods are created first
2. Wait for all pods to have back-references to PodGang
3. Create PodGang with complete PodReferences

#### New Flow (With Framework):
1. **Create PodGang early** with PodGroups having empty PodReferences and `Initialized=False`

> 2. **Create Pods** (with scheduling gates to block scheduling)

Reviewer: Could we do this without using the scheduling Gate, In large scale this would be intensive to modify all the pods spec to remove the scheduling Gate

Author: I agree with u. If we could refine this scheduling gate, that's would be a good enhancement. Maybe we should raise this question and discuss it in another GREP?

3. **Update PodGang** with PodReferences once all pods are created, and set `Initialized=True`
4. **Scheduling gates removed** to allow pods to be scheduled

#### New PodGang Status Condition

```go
const (
	// PodGangConditionTypeInitialized indicates that the PodGang has been populated
	// with pod references and pods can lift scheduling gates.
	PodGangConditionTypeInitialized PodGangConditionType = "Initialized"
)
```

We introduce Initialized as new PodGang Status Condition to signal that:
- All expected pods have been created

> - PodGang.Spec.PodGroups[].PodReferences have been populated

Author: Agree

> - PodGang.Spec.PodGroups[].PodReferences have been populated

Author: Done in the GREP.

* **Simplify User Experience**: Allow users to configure their preferred scheduler backend during Grove installation via OperatorConfiguration, eliminating the need to specify schedulerName in every pod specification.
* **Support Dynamic Backend Selection**: Enable Grove to determine which scheduler backend to use based on configuration, with clear mechanisms for backend registration and initialization.
* **Support Multiple Scheduler Backends**: Provide built-in support for multiple scheduler backends including the Kubernetes default-scheduler and KAI scheduler, with a clear path for adding additional third-party schedulers. The framework should enable easy integration of new schedulers as the community support for advanced features (gang scheduling, topology-aware scheduling) evolves.

### Non-Goals

* **Extract PodGang Reconciler**: Moving the PodGang reconciliation logic from the PodCliqueSet reconciler into an independent reconciler is out of scope. The current reconciliation architecture will be maintained.

> * **Support multiple active schedulers*: It is technically possible to run different schedulers in a Kubernetes cluster as long as care is taken to cleanly segregate Node resources that each scheduler targets to prevent race conditions leading to overbooking of Node resources. This version of the GREP does not provide means to run Grove operator with multiple active schedulers. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Support multiple active schedulers**: It is technically possible to run different schedulers in a Kubernetes cluster as long as care is taken to cleanly segregate Node resources that each scheduler targets to prevent race conditions leading to overbooking of Node resources. This version of the GREP does not provide means to run Grove operator with multiple active schedulers. 
```

## Proposal

The Scheduler Backend Framework introduces a plugin-like architecture that decouples Grove's workload management from scheduler-specific implementations. The framework consists of three main components:

1. **Interface**: A Go interface defining the contract between Grove and scheduler backends.
2. **Registry**: Mechanism for scheduler backends to register themselves during initialization.
3. **Lifecycle Hooks**: Well-defined points in the PodGang lifecycle where backend schedulers can inject custom logic.

The framework follows a plugin-based architecture where:
- Grove manages the high-level workflow and PodGang lifecycle
- Scheduler backends implement the interface to provide scheduler-specific behavior

> - The operator configuration determines which backend is active at runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The operator configuration determines which scheduler backend is active at runtime.
```

### User Stories

#### Story 1: Third-Party Scheduler Integration

As a third-party scheduler developer, I want to integrate my custom gang scheduler with Grove without modifying Grove's core codebase. The Scheduler Backend Framework should provide clear interfaces and documentation that allow me to implement a backend plugin for my scheduler, register it with Grove, and have Grove automatically use my scheduler for workload placement decisions.

#### Story 2: Multi-Cluster Deployment with Different Schedulers

As a platform engineer managing multiple Kubernetes clusters, I want to deploy Grove across clusters that use different schedulers (e.g., KAI in production clusters, default scheduler in development clusters). The framework should allow me to configure the appropriate scheduler backend for each cluster through OperatorConfiguration without changing workload specifications or Grove's deployment manifests.

#### Story 3: Scheduler Migration Path

> As a cluster administrator, I want to migrate from one scheduler to another (e.g., from a custom scheduler to KAI or vice versa) without significant disruption. The Scheduler Backend Framework should provide a clear migration path where I can update the OperatorConfiguration, restart Grove, and have new workloads use the new scheduler while existing workloads continue running.

Reviewer 2: Is it `Scheduler migration` or `Workload migration across clusters using different schedulers`?

### Limitations/Risks & Mitigations

> #### Single Backend Per Deployment in Phase1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Single Active Scheduler Backend

**Limitation**
If workload operators wish to have a flexibility to configure different schedulers at `PodCliqueSet` level within the same cluster, then this version of GREP does not offer that capability.

**Mitigation**
Kubernetes clusters typically run with a single scheduler to prevent resource contention across schedulers, unless care is taken to create multiple node pools and each scheduler is exclusively associated with a subset of node pools. In this version of the GREP this limitation is acceptable. Users who require multiple schedulers can run separate Grove installations with different active scheduler backend in each cluster.
```

#### Backend Implementation Responsibility

**Risk**: Scheduler backend implementations may introduce bugs or incompatibilities that affect Grove's functionality.

**Mitigation**: 
- Provide comprehensive interface documentation and reference implementations
- Define clear contracts and invariants that backends must maintain
- Implement validation in Grove to detect and reject invalid backend behaviors
- Provide a testing framework for backend developers to validate their implementations

#### Backend API Stability

**Risk**: Changes to the backend interface in future Grove versions could break existing backend implementations.

**Mitigation**:
- Follow semantic versioning for backend interfaces
- Maintain backward compatibility within major versions
- Provide deprecation notices and migration guides for interface changes
- Consider versioned interfaces if breaking changes are necessary

## Design Details

### Architecture Overview

The Scheduler Backend Framework introduces a clean separation between Grove's control plane logic and scheduler-specific implementations. The architecture is organized into four distinct layers:

> <img src="assets/scheduler-backend-framework.png" alt="scheduler-backend-architecture" style="zoom:50%;" />

Reviewer 2: I think you have used excalidraw for creating the diagram, right?
If yes, then please re-export the image and `embed the scene`. This will allow anyone in future to import the image and edit it as required.

Author: Good suggestion. Done

* **Future-Proof Architecture**: A foundation that can adapt to emerging scheduling requirements and new scheduler implementations in the Kubernetes ecosystem.

In summary, refining Grove and introducing a Scheduler Backend Framework is both an urgent and inevitable improvement that will ensure Grove's long-term viability and extensibility in the evolving Kubernetes scheduling landscape.

### Goals

* **Define Scheduler Backend Interface**: Introduce a well-defined Go interface that abstracts scheduler-specific operations, enabling Grove to work with multiple scheduler backends through a standardized contract.
* **Refine PodGang Lifecycle Management**: Optimize the PodGang creation and update workflow to integrate with the Scheduler Backend Framework, allowing scheduler backends to customize pod specifications during reconciliation.
* **Enable Custom Resource Management**: Provide interfaces that allow Scheduler Backends to create, update, and delete their own custom resources in response to PodGang lifecycle events (create, update, delete, status changes).

> * **Simplify User Experience**: Allow users to configure their preferred scheduler backend during Grove installation via OperatorConfiguration, eliminating the need to specify schedulerName in every pod specification.

Reviewer 2: >In reality, a cluster will have only one scheduler for all Grove workloads.

That is not necessarily true. If you wish to use KAI scheduler then it will always have to be the second scheduler and today it cannot completely replace the default scheduler.
In the end if you have well-defined node pools and you have segregated the target resource pools per scheduler then it is possible to have non-overlapping scheduling decisions targeting specific node pools.

#### Story 2: Multi-Cluster Deployment with Different Schedulers

As a platform engineer managing multiple Kubernetes clusters, I want to deploy Grove across clusters that use different schedulers (e.g., KAI in production clusters, default scheduler in development clusters). The framework should allow me to configure the appropriate scheduler backend for each cluster through OperatorConfiguration without changing workload specifications or Grove's deployment manifests.

#### Story 3: Scheduler Migration Path

As a cluster administrator, I want to migrate from one scheduler to another (e.g., from a custom scheduler to KAI or vice versa) without significant disruption. The Scheduler Backend Framework should provide a clear migration path where I can update the OperatorConfiguration, restart Grove, and have new workloads use the new scheduler while existing workloads continue running.

> ### Limitations/Risks & Mitigations

Reviewer: Agree on both 1,3 solutions 
I am not sure if I fully agree on status indicate, As the user request are invalid for the chosen scheduler,
might we should failed submission when using unsupported feature for the given scheduler backend      

WDYT @sanjaychatterjee @kangclzjc @unmarshall

> ### Limitations/Risks & Mitigations

Author: We will add a new method of ValidatePodCliqueSet to let the scheduler backend decide whether we should fail or just let it pass through.

#### Single Backend Per Deployment in Phase1

> **Limitation**: In the initial implementation, Grove can only be configured with one scheduler backend per deployment. Users cannot mix schedulers for different workloads within the same Grove installation.

Author: But actually it allows users to use multiple schedulers in one cluster like default scheduler and kai. But for Single Active Scheduler Backend, it would limit users to only use grove with one scheduler

	// Name is a unique name of the scheduler backend.
	// Used for logging and identification purposes.
	Name() string

	// Init provides a hook to initialize/setup one-time scheduler resources,
	// called at the startup of Grove operator.
	// Backends can perform tasks such as:
	// - Creating global custom resources required by the scheduler
	// - Validating scheduler availability and configuration
	// - Setting up any initial state
	Init() error

	// SyncPodGang synchronizes (creates/updates) scheduler specific resources for a PodGang
	// reacting to a creation or update of a PodGang resource.
	// This is called by the Backend Controller when PodGang spec changes.
	// Backends should:
	// - Create scheduler-specific custom resources (e.g., PodGroup, Workload)
	// - Update existing resources if the PodGang spec changed
	// - Use owner references to enable automatic cleanup
	SyncPodGang(ctx context.Context, podGang *groveschedulerv1alpha1.PodGang) error

	// OnPodGangDelete cleans up scheduler specific resources for the given PodGang.
	// This is called when a PodGang is deleted.
	// Note: If using owner references, cleanup is automatic and this can be a no-op.

> 	OnPodGangDelete(ctx context.Context, podGang *groveschedulerv1alpha1.PodGang) error

Author: Actually, we leverage this function to do some customized clean work, for different scheduler, it may need different extra work

* **Future-Proof Architecture**: A foundation that can adapt to emerging scheduling requirements and new scheduler implementations in the Kubernetes ecosystem.

In summary, refining Grove and introducing a Scheduler Backend Framework is both an urgent and inevitable improvement that will ensure Grove's long-term viability and extensibility in the evolving Kubernetes scheduling landscape.

### Goals

* **Define Scheduler Backend Interface**: Introduce a well-defined Go interface that abstracts scheduler-specific operations, enabling Grove to work with multiple scheduler backends through a standardized contract.
* **Refine PodGang Lifecycle Management**: Optimize the PodGang creation and update workflow to integrate with the Scheduler Backend Framework, allowing scheduler backends to customize pod specifications during reconciliation.
* **Enable Custom Resource Management**: Provide interfaces that allow Scheduler Backends to create, update, and delete their own custom resources in response to PodGang lifecycle events (create, update, delete, status changes).

> * **Simplify User Experience**: Allow users to configure their preferred scheduler backend during Grove installation via OperatorConfiguration, eliminating the need to specify schedulerName in every pod specification.

Reviewer 2: I am adding this comment here so that it is captured here.

----------------
We did discuss if it would make sense to add a convenience field `SchedulerName` at the PCS level. This can make it easy for the workload operators in the following ways:
* There is no need to define schedulerName in every PodSpec.
* There is no need to make sure that all schedulerName fields in every PodSpec has the same value.
* Since OperatorConfiguration is admin controlled and workload operators do not see it, its hard for them to know what is the default scheduler. In case the schedulerName field in PodSpec's is not set then this can lead to some surprises in case there are multiple schedulers enabled and admin has marked a different scheduler as default which workload operators did not expect. 

For now the decision is to not have this field in the API as then we commit to the fact that there can be atmost one scheduler backend for a single PCS. If there are cases where a single PCS can span across clusters then this can come in the way. So we park this for now and take a call later when we have more clarity on how we are going to support a single PCS across multiple clusters.

* **Support Dynamic Backend Selection**: Enable Grove to determine which scheduler backend to use based on configuration, with clear mechanisms for backend registration and initialization.

> * **Support Multiple Scheduler Backends**: Provide built-in support for multiple scheduler backends including the Kubernetes kube-scheduler and KAI scheduler, with a clear path for adding additional third-party schedulers. The framework should enable easy integration of new schedulers as the community support for advanced features (gang scheduling, topology-aware scheduling) evolves.

Reviewer 2: Last 2 goals are quite similar:
* Support Multiple Scheduler Backend
* Support Dynamic Backend Selection

All the above deal with how to configure preferred/multiple scheduler backend. Perhaps we need to combine them into a well defined non-overlapping goals.

3. **Lifecycle Hooks**: Well-defined points in the PodGang lifecycle where backend schedulers can inject custom logic.
4. **Operator Configuration**: OperatorConfiguration allows enabling multiple scheduler backends simultaneously. 

The framework follows an architecture where:
- The operator configuration determines which schedulers backend are active at runtime and which backend is default backend. We support multiple active schedulers at first. 
- Grove manages the high-level workflow and `PodGang` lifecycle
- Scheduler backend(s) implement the interface to provide scheduler-specific behavior

### User Stories

#### Story 1: Third-Party Scheduler Integration

As a third-party scheduler developer, I want to integrate my custom gang scheduler with Grove without modifying Grove's core codebase. The Scheduler Backend Framework should provide clear interfaces and documentation that allow me to implement a backend plugin for my scheduler, register it with Grove, and have Grove automatically use my scheduler for workload placement decisions.

#### Story 2: Multi-Cluster Deployment with Different Schedulers

> As a platform engineer managing multiple Kubernetes clusters, I want to deploy Grove across clusters that use different schedulers (e.g., KAI in production clusters, default scheduler in development clusters). The framework should allow me to configure the appropriate scheduler backend for each cluster through OperatorConfiguration without changing workload specifications or Grove's deployment manifests.

Reviewer 2: >The framework should allow me to configure the appropriate scheduler backend for each cluster through OperatorConfiguration without changing workload specifications or Grove's deployment manifests.

This is not really possible. If you configure a different scheduler then you must also change the PCS PodSpecs to reflect the change in schedulerName.

**Mitigation**:
- Follow semantic versioning for backend interfaces
- Maintain backward compatibility within major versions
- Provide deprecation notices and migration guides for interface changes
- Consider versioned interfaces if breaking changes are necessary

#### Scheduler Capability Mismatch

**Limitation**:
Different schedulers have varying capabilities, which may not align with the uniform capability set exposed through the PodGang API.

**Mitigation**:
- **For Missing Capabilities**: The framework provides a clear contract so that each scheduler backend can decide how to handle requested features it does not support:
  - **Fail submit**: The scheduler backend can reject PodCliqueSet when the missing capability is required for correctness or safety.
  - **Pass through**: The backend allows the request and the workload proceeds; the backend should ensure PodCliqueSet status is updated with conditions indicating which features are not supported (e.g. "GangScheduling requested but not supported by this backend—workload scheduled without gang guarantees"). This gives users explicit feedback while allowing best-effort scheduling.

>   The choice between fail vs pass-through is entirely up to each backend implementation, so that different schedulers can adopt the policy that fits their semantics

Reviewer 2: Can you also add a note as a recommendation, that if TAS `required` constraints are defined for a PCS and the scheduler chosen does not yet support TAS then it should fail. So backend implementation of `ValidatePodCliqueSet` should respect API semantics. The above (TAS) is just one example but in principle any constraint that is a hard requirement (not preferred) then it should fail rather than allow it to be scheduled.

## Design Details

### Architecture Overview

The Scheduler Backend Framework introduces a clean separation between Grove's control plane logic and scheduler-specific implementations. The architecture is organized into four distinct layers:

<img src="assets/scheduler-backend-framework.excalidraw.png" alt="scheduler-backend-framework-architecture" style="zoom:50%;" />

#### Layer 1: Configuration Layer
User-facing configuration that defines scheduler profiles (which backends are active and which is the default):
- **OperatorConfiguration**: Add additional scheduler-related configuration fields
- **Helm Values**: Deployment-time configuration (`config.scheduler`)

#### Layer 2: Grove Control Plane
Core controllers and webhooks managing Grove workload lifecycle:
- **PodCliqueSet Controller**: Creates PodGang resources, fills PodReferences
- **PodCliqueSet Validation Webhook**: Admits create/update of PodCliqueSet by calling the resolved backend's `ValidatePodCliqueSet()`

> - **Backend Controller**: Watches PodGang, calls `SyncPodGang()` to create scheduler CRs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Backend Controller**: Watches PodGang, calls `SchedulerBackend.SyncPodGang()` to creates scheduler specific CRs if needed.
```

- **PodClique Controller**: Creates Pods, calls `PreparePod()` to configure scheduler settings
- **Resources**: PodGang (with Initialized condition) and Pod (with schedulerName/gates)

#### Layer 3: Scheduler Backend Layer
Abstraction layer bridging Grove and specific schedulers:

> - **Backend Manager**: Singleton that initializes and provides access to active backend

Author: Yes, let me do this

> - **KAI Backend**: Implementation for KAI scheduler (creates PodGroup CRs in future)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **KAI Backend**: Implementation for KAI scheduler (maps PodGang resources to PodGroup custom resource(s))
```

      config:
        GangScheduling: true
      default: true
```

```yaml
# --- Style 4: Multiple backends; default is kube-scheduler ---
scheduler:
  profiles:
    - name: "kube-scheduler"
      config:
        GangScheduling: false
      default: true
    - name: "kai-scheduler"
      config: {}
```

```yaml
# --- Style 5: Multiple backends; default is kai-scheduler ---
scheduler:
  profiles:
    - name: "kube-scheduler"
      config:
        GangScheduling: false
    - name: "kai-scheduler"
      config: {}
      default: true
```

```yaml
# --- Style 6: Only KAI profile, but kube-scheduler is also active even if not set in profiles --- 
scheduler:
  profiles:
    - name: "kai-scheduler"
      config: {}
      default: true
```

**Phase 1 vs Phase 2:**

- **Phase 1** (Current): Both KAI and Kube backends have minimal no-op implementations. All backend interface methods (`Init`, `SyncPodGang`, `OnPodGangDelete`, `PreparePod`, `ValidatePodCliqueSet`) return immediately without creating any scheduler-specific resources. KAI scheduler continues to read PodGang CRs directly. This phase focuses on establishing the framework infrastructure and interfaces.
- **Phase 2** (Future):

>   - **KAI Backend**: All PodGang-related management and KAI’s own CR (e.g. PodGroup) management will be moved into the KAI backend. The backend will implement scheduler backend interfaces to create update KAI CRs, providing cleaner separation and allowing KAI scheduler modifications to be minimized.

Author: Yes, this should be in Phase1, but maybe in different PRs

  - **Kube Backend**: Will support advanced community features as they become available, including Workload API for gang scheduling and other emerging Kubernetes scheduling capabilities. The backend will translate PodGang specifications to the appropriate Kubernetes-native scheduling primitives.

### PodGang Lifecycle Changes

**Critical Design Change**: The PodGang creation flow has been fundamentally changed to support scheduler backends that require resources to exist before pods are created (e.g., Workload API):

#### Previous Flow (Before Framework):
1. Pods are created first
2. Wait for all pods to have back-references to PodGang
3. Create PodGang with complete PodReferences

> #### New Flow (With Framework):

Reviewer 3: Can you please clarify the flow when the scheduler backend will create a scheduler specific CRs for the workload, e.g. PodGroup for KAI, or Workload for kube-scheduler?

Kubernetes schedulers that actually place pods:
- **kai-scheduler**: Gang scheduling with topology awareness
- **kube-scheduler**: Default Kubernetes scheduler

**Key Data Flow:**

The framework orchestrates workload scheduling through a coordinated flow between layers:
1. **Backend Initialization**: Operator startup initializes the configured scheduler backend via Backend Manager
2. **PCS Admission**: On PodCliqueSet create or update, the validation webhook resolves the backend and calls `ValidatePodCliqueSet()`; the request is admitted or rejected accordingly
3. **PodGang Creation**: PodCliqueSet Controller creates PodGang resources with `Initialized=False` condition, triggering Backend Controller to create scheduler-specific resources via `SyncPodGang()`
4. **Pod Configuration**: PodClique Controller creates Pods with scheduling gates, calling `PreparePod()` to inject scheduler-specific settings
5. **Scheduling Activation**: Once all pods exist and PodReferences are populated, the `Initialized` condition is set to `True`, gates are removed, and scheduling begins

For detailed lifecycle flow, see [PodGang Lifecycle Changes](#podgang-lifecycle-changes).

> ### Backend Interface Definition

Reviewer 2: Rename this to `Scheduler Backend Interface`

	Init() error

	// SyncPodGang synchronizes (creates/updates) scheduler specific resources for a PodGang
	// reacting to a creation or update of a PodGang resource.
	// This is called by the Backend Controller when PodGang spec changes.
	// Backends should:
	// - Create scheduler-specific custom resources (e.g., PodGroup, Workload)
	// - Update existing resources if the PodGang spec changed
	// - Use owner references to enable automatic cleanup
	SyncPodGang(ctx context.Context, podGang *groveschedulerv1alpha1.PodGang) error

	// OnPodGangDelete cleans up scheduler specific resources for the given PodGang.
	// This is called when a PodGang is deleted.
	// Note: If using owner references, cleanup is automatic and this can be a no-op.
	OnPodGangDelete(ctx context.Context, podGang *groveschedulerv1alpha1.PodGang) error

	// PreparePod adds scheduler backend specific configuration to the given Pod object
	// prior to its creation. This includes setting schedulerName,
	// annotations, etc.
	// This is called during Pod creation in the PodClique controller.
	PreparePod(pod *corev1.Pod)

	// ValidatePodCliqueSet validates a PodCliqueSet for this scheduler backend.

> 	// Called by the PodCliqueSet validation webhook (create and update). Backends can perform

Reviewer 2: // ValidatePodCliqueSet provides an ability to the scheduler backends to run additional
// validations on the PodCliqueSet resource. For example - if a scheduler does not yet support 
// topology aware placements and if the PodCliqueSet has defined required topology pack constraints
// then it can choose to reject the PodCliqueSet by returning an error.

Author: Added.

	// that requested features are supported, capacity limits). Return nil to allow, or an error
	// to reject the request (the error message is returned to the client).
	ValidatePodCliqueSet(ctx context.Context, pcs *groveschedulerv1alpha1.PodCliqueSet) error
}
```

**Future note:** Cluster topology (e.g. multi-cluster topology support) may require its own extension point or additional methods on this interface; the interface is expected to evolve as those needs are clarified.

### Backend Manager

> The manager initializes scheduler backends: the kube-scheduler backend is always created and active; additional backends are created from OperatorConfiguration profiles. It provides access by name and a default:

Author: Got it. Backend Manager only initialize the backends from config

```

### OperatorConfiguration Extension

The OperatorConfiguration is extended with a `scheduler` block: `profiles` lists scheduler profiles (each with `name`, optional `config`, and `default`). **The kube-scheduler backend is always enabled and active**, regardless of whether it appears in `profiles`. kube-scheduler may also be listed in `profiles` with custom configuration (e.g. per-backend options), same as other backends.

Profiles are used to enable other backends (e.g. kai-scheduler), to give kube-scheduler optional custom config when listed, and to choose which profile is the default (exactly one profile should have `default: true`). The profile with `default: true` is used when a workload does not specify a scheduler. If no profile has `default: true`, kube-scheduler is used as the default (since it is always active).

**When `profiles` is empty:** If `scheduler.profiles` is explicitly set to an empty list, only the kube-scheduler backend is active (it is always active). In this case, only admit PodCliqueSet resources whose pod spec has `schedulerName` empty or set to `"default-scheduler"`; reject (do not admit) PCS whose pod spec specifies any other scheduler name.

> **API shape:**

Reviewer 2: what is API shape? Can you just change this to:

#### API (H4 heading)

**Configuration options and ways to configure**

| Goal | How to configure |
|------|-------------------|
| Use kube-scheduler only (no extra options) | Omit `scheduler` or set `scheduler.profiles: []`. kube-scheduler is always active and is the default. |
| Use kube-scheduler and tune its behavior | One profile: `name: "kube-scheduler"`, `config: { GangScheduling: true }`, `default: true`. |
| Use kai-scheduler as default | `scheduler.profiles: [{ name: "kai-scheduler", config: {}, default: true }]`. kube-scheduler remains active; default is kai-scheduler. |
| Multiple backends, kube-scheduler default | Add profiles for each; e.g. kube-scheduler (with optional config) and kai-scheduler; set `default: true` on kube-scheduler profile. |
| Multiple backends, kai-scheduler default | Add profiles for each; e.g. kube-scheduler (with optional config) and kai-scheduler; set `default: true` on kai-scheduler profile. |

**Example YAML (OperatorConfiguration / Helm `config`):**

```yaml

> # --- Style 1: Omit scheduler (all defaults) ---

Reviewer 2: Lets not call it `Style`. It is a `Variant`

# Same as profiles: [{ name: "kube-scheduler", default: true }]
# (scheduler block can be omitted entirely)
```

```yaml
# --- Style 2: Single backend, no backend-specific options ---
scheduler:
  profiles:
    - name: "kube-scheduler"
      default: true
```

```yaml
# --- Style 3: Single backend with backend-specific options (config = KubeSchedulerConfig) ---
scheduler:
  profiles:
    - name: "kube-scheduler"
      config:
        GangScheduling: true
      default: true
```

```yaml
# --- Style 4: Multiple backends; default is kube-scheduler ---
scheduler:
  profiles:
    - name: "kube-scheduler"
      config:
        GangScheduling: true
      default: true
    - name: "kai-scheduler"
      config: {}
```

```yaml
# --- Style 5: Multiple backends; default is kai-scheduler ---
scheduler:
  profiles:
    - name: "kube-scheduler"
      config:
        GangScheduling: true
    - name: "kai-scheduler"
      config: {}
      default: true
```

```yaml
# --- Style 6: Only kai-scheduler profile, but kube-scheduler is also active even if not set in profiles --- 
scheduler:
  profiles:
    - name: "kai-scheduler"
      config: {}
      default: true
```

> **Phase 1 vs Phase 2:**

Reviewer 2: This entire section is misplaced. If you really want to capture it under `Implementation History` when you start implementing it. Update the GREP to add details to that section. For now you can remove this section entirely.

  - **KAI Backend**: Full implementation—all PodGang-related management and kai-scheduler’s own CR (e.g. PodGroup) management are in the KAI backend. The backend implements the scheduler backend interface to create and update KAI CRs, providing clean separation and allowing kai-scheduler modifications to be minimized.
  - **Kube Backend**: Minimal no-op implementation. All backend interface methods (`Init`, `SyncPodGang`, `OnPodGangDelete`, `PreparePod`, `ValidatePodCliqueSet`) return immediately without creating any scheduler-specific resources.
- **Phase 2** (Future):
  - **Kube Backend**: Will support advanced community features as they become available, including Workload API for gang scheduling and other emerging Kubernetes scheduling capabilities. The backend will translate PodGang specifications to the appropriate Kubernetes-native scheduling primitives.

### PodGang Lifecycle Changes

**Critical Design Change**: The PodGang creation flow has been fundamentally changed to support scheduler backends that require resources to exist before pods are created (e.g., Workload API):

#### Previous Flow (Before Framework):

> 1. Pods are created first

Reviewer 2: This is not the complete flow. Since you are mentioning the flow then it should be mentioned in its totality.

2. Wait for all pods to have back-references to PodGang
3. Create PodGang with complete PodReferences

#### New Flow (With Framework):
1. **Create PodGang early** with PodGroups having empty PodReferences and `Initialized=False`.
2. **Backend creates scheduler-specific CRs**: The Backend Controller reconciles the new PodGang and calls `SyncPodGang()` on the resolved backend. The backend creates or updates its scheduler-specific resources (e.g. PodGroup for kai-scheduler, Workload for kube-scheduler when supported). These CRs must exist before pods are allowed to be scheduled so the scheduler can enforce gang/topology semantics.
3. **Create Pods** (with scheduling gates to block scheduling). Pod creation may call `PreparePod()` to inject scheduler-specific settings (e.g. `schedulerName`, annotations).
4. **Update PodGang** with PodReferences once all pods are created, and set `Initialized=True`.
5. **Scheduling gates removed** to allow pods to be scheduled. The scheduler uses the backend-created CRs (PodGroup/Workload) when placing pods.

> #### New PodGang Status Condition

Author: Done

- Test backend registration (success, duplicate registration)
- Test backend retrieval (existing, non-existing)

**KAI Backend Implementation** (`operator/internal/schedulerBackend/kai/`)
- Test pod spec mutation
- Test configuration validation
- Test ValidatePodCliqueSet (allow when valid, reject when scheduler-specific rules fail)

**Kube Backend Implementation** (`operator/internal/schedulerBackend/kube/`)
- Test pod spec mutation
- Test configuration validation
- Test ValidatePodCliqueSet (allow when valid, reject when scheduler-specific rules fail)

**Controller Integration** (`operator/internal/controller/podcliqueset/`)
- Test PodGang creation with empty pods references
- Test PodGang update with filling pods references

**Controller Integration** (`operator/internal/controller/podclique/`)
- Test backend errors and failure handling
- Test pod creation with backend mutation
- Test lift schedulingGate after Initialized is true

**OperatorConfiguration** (`operator/api/config/v1alpha1/`)
- Test configuration validation
- Test backend configuration parsing
- Test default values
- Test invalid backend names

#### E2E Tests

> All existing e2e tests should be passed based on all supported schedulers.

Reviewer 2: What you miss here is changes that need to be done for E2E which today always assumes a specific scheduler backend (KAI). Currently there is no way to configure that.

### Graduation Criteria

The Scheduler Backend Framework will follow a staged rollout approach:

#### Alpha
- Core backend interface defined and implemented
- Backend registry functional

> - Basic operator configuration support

Author: Yes, should be, and also I add Gang for Kube backend as beta.

* **Refine PodGang Lifecycle Management**: Optimize the PodGang creation and update workflow to integrate with the Scheduler Backend Framework, allowing scheduler backends to customize pod specifications during reconciliation.
* **Enable Custom Resource Management**: Provide interfaces that allow Scheduler Backends to create, update, and delete their own custom resources in response to PodGang lifecycle events (create, update, delete, status changes).
* **Simplify User Experience**: Allow users to configure their preferred scheduler backend during Grove installation via OperatorConfiguration, eliminating the need to specify schedulerName in every pod specification.
* **Maintain Backward Compatibility**: Ensure existing KAI scheduler deployments continue to work without any changes.
* **Support Dynamic Backend Selection**: Enable Grove to determine which scheduler backend to use based on configuration, with clear mechanisms for backend registration and initialization.

### Non-Goals

> * **Implement Additional Scheduler Backends**: Adding support for the default Kubernetes scheduler or other schedulers beyond KAI is explicitly out of scope for this initial framework implementation. The community support for gang scheduling and topology-aware scheduling in the default scheduler is still evolving. Support for additional schedulers will be added in subsequent PRs once the framework is established.

Reviewer 2: This cannot be a non-goal for a GREP. Maybe for a PR that introduces that framework.

Author: Moved it to goals. This GREP should contains more things which we may not finish it in one PR.

> * **Change PodGang API Semantics**: PodGang remains Grove's primary scheduler API. This proposal does not alter the fundamental contract or semantics of the PodGang API, only how it interfaces with scheduler backends.

Author: Removed.

* **Remove Existing KAI Scheduler Modifications**: The current modifications made to KAI scheduler to support PodGang will remain. This proposal does not aim to revert or remove those changes, but rather to provide a framework that could reduce such modifications for future schedulers.
* **Extract PodGang Reconciler**: Moving the PodGang reconciliation logic from the PodCliqueSet reconciler into an independent reconciler is out of scope. The current reconciliation architecture will be maintained.
* **Multi-Scheduler Support**: Running multiple different schedulers simultaneously within a single Grove installation is not supported in this iteration. Users can only configure one scheduler backend per Grove deployment.

> * **Scheduler Performance Optimization**: This proposal focuses on extensibility and maintainability, not on optimizing the performance characteristics of any particular scheduler implementation.

Reviewer 2: Not clear. Is it not clear from the purpose of this GREP that scheduler specific performance optimizations can never be handled when providing pluggability?

Author: yes, it's unrelated with this GREP. should be removed

## Proposal

The Scheduler Backend Framework introduces a plugin-like architecture that decouples Grove's workload management from scheduler-specific implementations. The framework consists of three main components:

1. **Backend Interface**: A Go interface defining the contract between Grove and scheduler backends

> 2. **Backend Registry**: A registration mechanism allowing backends to register themselves during initialization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Registry**: Mechanism for scheduler backends to register themselves during initialization.
```

#### Story 2: Multi-Cluster Deployment with Different Schedulers

As a platform engineer managing multiple Kubernetes clusters, I want to deploy Grove across clusters that use different schedulers (e.g., KAI in production clusters, default scheduler in development clusters). The framework should allow me to configure the appropriate scheduler backend for each cluster through OperatorConfiguration without changing workload specifications or Grove's deployment manifests.

#### Story 3: Scheduler Migration Path

As a cluster administrator, I want to migrate from one scheduler to another (e.g., from a custom scheduler to KAI or vice versa) without significant disruption. The Scheduler Backend Framework should provide a clear migration path where I can update the OperatorConfiguration, restart Grove, and have new workloads use the new scheduler while existing workloads continue running.

### Limitations/Risks & Mitigations

> #### Single Backend Per Deployment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Single Backend Per Deployment in Phase1
```

**Limitation**: Grove can only be configured with one scheduler backend per deployment. Users cannot mix schedulers for different workloads within the same Grove installation.

**Mitigation**: This is acceptable for most use cases as clusters typically standardize on a single scheduler. Users requiring multiple schedulers can run separate Grove installations with different configurations in different clusters.

#### Backend Implementation Responsibility

**Risk**: Scheduler backend implementations may introduce bugs or incompatibilities that affect Grove's functionality.

**Mitigation**: 
- Provide comprehensive interface documentation and reference implementations
- Define clear contracts and invariants that backends must maintain
- Implement validation in Grove to detect and reject invalid backend behaviors
- Provide a testing framework for backend developers to validate their implementations

> #### Migration Complexity

Reviewer 3: Let's remove this migration complexity section for now.

Author: Yes, removed.
